Then he went on to note that as
his
notoriety as a splendid hurdler broadened, a
reporter for the Beaumont Enterprise inquired
where he planned to go to college And he responded
that he assumed he'd go to the University of Texas
since they had a good team.
The next day, the day after the appearance of the
article,
he recalled that, quote, a little man knocked on
his front door, quote,
and soon told him that he was, quote, too fine a
person to go to the University of Texas. He should
be an Aggie.
That same gentleman promised that he would get 100
Aggies to write letters of encouragement
to this trackster.
who then smiled and recall that
the letters did come
and that there was, quote, not a penny of bribe in
any of them,
comma, quote, but that Mr Babcock's
intervention in his plan had changed his had
altered his life. A redirection for which he would
always be grateful.
Another example of the.
Changes at A&M and the role. And the key role of Earl
Rudder.
was linked to integration.
Mr. Rutter was by that time a major general in the
U.S. Army Reserve and thus was well acquainted
with the routine of the Department of Defense.
As the time came for enrollment of the first black
students.
I understand that Major General Rutter called the
appropriate office in the Pentagon
and requested that when they sent, when they
identified the enlisted personnel to be sent at
Army expense to A&M to complete their
undergraduate degrees, that they include some
black soldiers.
He continued to urge that those men be carefully
reviewed so that there would be no difficulty
about their academic record.
or other
uh background matters
then president rudder directed lloyd heaton
the veteran registrar and director of admissions
to review the transcript of these men and to ensure
that they were enrolled in the proper summer
courses. Since registration at that time was
conducted either in Sabisa Hall or G. Riley White
Coliseum, it was an old-fashioned affair where
everyone stood in line and waited their turn.
Mr. Rutter saw such a routine as having the
potential for an incident, or perhaps even some
protesters.
So he told Mr. Heaton,
whom I had heard earlier to say, that it would be,
quote, over his dead body that a black student ever
enrolled at A&M,
comma, quote, that Heaton was to ensure that the
students were in the appropriate
sections and that he was to personally call each of
the instructors of those courses to inform them
that these enlisted men had been fully admitted
and were appropriately enrolled.
Since registration was on a Monday afternoon,
those calls were on Monday morning, those calls
were made Monday afternoon and
the first knowledge that the public had of
integration at the land-grant school
was
when a news report was announced that evening on
radio and television that for the first time in its
history, Texas A&M had enrolled black students
had attended classes at Texas A&M that morning.
There was not a single problem,
never an incident, and racial integration
probably
moved more quietly and
smoothly at A&M than at any other major
institution in the nation. Meanwhile, I
overlooked back as I was going through Austin,
overlooked the end of the item on the name change,
and this should be taken back.
Vice President Hall recalled not long ago that Mr.
Rutter simply could not accept the drop, the
change to Texas State University because it would
mean the loss of the traditional identifier A&M.
Dr. Hall said it was he who created the idea and
offered the proposal that the name simply become
simply Texas A&M University with no periods after
the initial A or M and that the there be an ampersand
Instead of the. Word a indeed.
For Mr Rutter, that was a. Very positive
alternative.
And thus. The effort proceeded smoothly.
Gradually women began to be admitted. with less
difficulty at the undergraduate level and the
enrollment moved forward.
As we entered the year of 1970,
which would mark Mr Rudder's 60th birthday. Most
of us were unaware
that he was having health worries.
During that spring complications from both heart
and liver
attacked him at almost simultaneously. and he
died one month before his 60th birthday, thus
making him ineligible for many veterans'
benefits.
Not even his classmate, Congressman Olin E. Tiger
T., could obtain an exception to the 60-year
policy.
The board of directors appointed Clyde Freeman,
appointed retired
Lieutenant General Alvin Ludeke,
Mike Teague and Rudder, a member of the class of 31,
as the interim president. General Ludeke
had earned a remarkable,
had created a remarkable record of leadership
success
in directing the
federal laboratory in California
where the military rocket research efforts had
been notable for their lack of success
until he became the director of the Jet Propulsion
Lab, JPL.
Quiet in his demeanor.
And always well organized.
A&M proceeded forward.
Meanwhile. Unknown to most of us. The board.
had acted upon the advice of Earl Rudder in seeking
a replacement.
Back in the summer of 1968,
Fort Albritton,
class of 41
or 42, I think, can look that up, The founding
president and CEO of All Britain Engineering,
Alenco, a booming little industry in Bryan,
had proudly bought his company's first jet plane.
For a number of months, he had been trying to
persuade President Rudder to
select a national public relations firm to begin
to market A&M
on a well-organized
basis to a larger That
effort, that effort bore fruit when All Britain
and his classmate, dear friend, John Lindsay
picked Mr. Rudder up for a flight to Chicago to
visit with the PR firm.
As Mr. Albritton recalls, they were somewhere
over the Midwest, quote, somewhere over the
Midwest, quote, when he turned to the A&M
president
and proudly noted the growth and progress fully
underway on the campus.
Then he asked
Mr. Rutter what would be the circumstances
regarding continued leadership if, quote, God
help us,
something were to happen to you. Do you have
someone in place that could step in?
Hesitantly, the A&M president noted that he had
learned in battle in the battlefields in Western
Europe that you, quote, always need an adjutant
because any commanding officer may go down in
battle. But at the present time, he had no one of
that sort and that he would have to work on it.
the two traveling companions dropped the
subject. But then that evening over supper, then
during dinner that evening, all Britain returned
to the topic and inquired again.
He remembered that Mr. Rudder smiled and said,
I've been thinking about it since this afternoon,
and if anything ever happened to me, you need to go
to Tennessee and talk to Jack Kenny Williams,
period, quote.
The NM president noted that Williams had been the
first commissioner of higher education for
Texas, Thus had organized the Coordinating
Board. And had worked with real skill and success.
With the state legislature.
Public schools. And all of the key leaders. In the
state.
Further, he noted. That Williams. Following a
splendid. record of valor and achievement as a
Marine in the Pacific in World War II.
Had joined the faculty at Clemson University as a
junior historian
and worked his way up to the position as chief
academic officer during the years that that
separate land grant school in a southern state
located off the main highway about a hundred miles
from the state capitol where the state university
was located and
where
whose
supporters told Clemson jokes.
A situation very much like Texas A&M and its
realities in the Lone Star State. More, most
importantly, he added that Clemson
had changed from being an all-male, racially
segregated institution with a comparatively
narrow curriculum and a mandatory
military organization for all freshmen and
sophomores
and had changed all of those policies during the
Williams years. Thus, he could understand A&M
well.
At the time of Mr. Rutter's passing, All Britain
was a new member of the board of directors.
And in executive session, he shared, quote,
Earl's recommendations with his colleagues.
Quickly, the group decided to fly to Tennessee to
interview Dr. Williams, who was the chief
academic officer for the University of Tennessee
system.
All of the director, A&M directors except one,
went on the trip.
And the
lone absentee who had a business commitment that
he simply could not reschedule, truly could not
reschedule,
were so impressed with Jack Williams that they
agreed unanimously on site that he was the new
president.
Sadly,
All Britain noted
that the absentee
future Senator Peyton McKnight, P-E-Y-T-O-N, of
Tyler, was so enraged that his director
colleagues had reached a decision without him
that he voted against Dr. Williams' appointment
and later
shook his finger in the new president's face as he
informed him, I voted against you and I will be
against you as long as you were here.
Paragraph.
I learned of Dr. Williams' selection through a
phone call from George Kunze, the dean of the
graduate school.
a soil mineralogist who had grown up near Warda
in a Windish family, W-E-N-D-I-S-H.
I had the
pleasure and honor of working with Dr. Kunze in the
graduate college for almost three years.
That appointment began
unexpectedly
after I invited
Dr. Wayne Hall
to speak to the History Club
about going to graduate school and what kind of
record it took for a undergraduate to be admitted
to top flight graduate programs.
Stevens and I were the volunteer advisors to the
club and tried to place before those hopeful
students individuals who might help encourage
future attainment.
Following the presentation, Dr. Hall and his
associate graduate dean, Bill Barzyk,
asked me to walk back to their office in the Koch
building with them. Bill and I had been the
co-drafters of the entire aspirations report
with his having responsibility for the portion on
research and the experiment stations and
extension service while I did the RISL portion.
When we reached the Koch building I was pleasantly
surprised when they asked me if I would be willing
to join them as the assistant dean of the graduate
school
on a half-time basis. I asked them if I might still
teach and they said of course I might so I devoted I
taught two sections, continued to teach two
sections of history while
serving as assistant graduate dean. In addition,
I had accepted the assignment from my
dissertation advisor, Frank Vandiver, as the
founding editor of the papers in Jefferson Davis.
Paragraph. Following the completion of my
dissertation, I dreamed of doing a book-length
project on the creation of the Confederate States
of America, particularly the government of the
independent South during the period that it
located during the period from the secession of
South Carolina in December 1860
until the movement of the CSA capital to Richmond
in June of 1861.
Beginning in the summer of 61, The research on that
project took me and the family on the road each
summer.
Within two summers, Vandiver had come up with the
Civil War Centennial Commission. The National
Civil War Centennial Commission had reached a
decision to support the publication of the, and
underline this as title, the papers of Ulysses S.
Grant and the papers of Jefferson Davis.
Vandiver saw this as a two-volume project, the
Davis project as a two-volume effort, and asked me
as I went around to libraries and other
depositories looking for materials related to
the founding of the Independent South about Davis
materials.
At the end of the summer, I reported back to him that
all of the librarians had indicated they would
not share copies of their materials if it was only
going to be a selective project but would
cooperate fully if the plan was modified to
include all Davis correspondence to and from
Davis and his speeches and other appropriate
materials. Meanwhile, he had reached the same
conclusion
and he became the director of the Jefferson Davis
effort and selected me as the editor.
I had been going to Houston two afternoons a week,
Tuesday and Thursday afternoon, just leaving the
campus at about 11 o'clock, so I was at Rice from 1
until 6 o'clock or so. Thus, I was teaching two
sections, spending two half days a week at Rice,
and now would undertake the halftime task
assistant dean of the graduate
under programs which under the new nomenclature
at A&M was identified as the Graduate College.
Paragraph working with Dr. Hall and Bill Barzac
was very meaningful because I was able to view.